n its evidence before the parliamentary committee of 1749 the
Hudson's Bay Company was,compelled to fall back upon the vague
/ wanderings of Henry Kellsey, in the previous century, to bolster up its
| contention that it had been true-to the implied obligationé of its charter
| that is to say, that it had promoted the exploration of the vast territory
granted by King Charles the Second. It was part of the irony of
(circumstances that only five years gijgr the publication of the commit-
e's report a really effective argument was furnished, on behalf of the
pany, by the expedition of Anthony Hendry.
“Sqn impartial analysis of Kellsey’s: journal leaves the impression
that the company’s case would have, beon very little weakened by its
omission\ It has been claimed for Kellsey that on this journey
“of 1691 ot\1692 he reached the Seskatchewan country.
Dr. Elliott
Cones even ‘went so far as to cay that “Kellsey was on Lake
Winnipeg in July and ‘August, 1692. ‘The statement was made at
recond hand. - TiNDr. Coues had kept to his usual careful practice of
relying only pon the original documents, he would have found that
there is nothing whatever in Kellsey’s journal to support such a conten-
tion. Neither is there dy satisfactory proof tliat he reached. the Sas-
‘atchewan, or was at ‘ny tine within the valley of the Saskatchewan.
His distances and directions yad his descriptions of the country tra-
versed, so far as they suggest anything, yather go to show that his route
lay toward South Indian lake or Granville Jake, on the’ waters of the
Churchill. ‘The whole narrative, however, especially in the light of eur-
rounding circumstances, is too unsubstyntial to afford any safe ground
for historical conclusions,
The case of Anthony Hendry is entirdly different: It is possible to
follow him ahinost step by step, fom tho titge he léft York Factory, in
Tune, 1754, until he returned to it in-Tune’ ol the following year. Dur-
ing that period of nearly twelve months this\plucky young fur-trader
travelled, with no white companion, a thousand \niles inland, from York
Factory to the upper waters of the South Sdskktchewan, wintering in
the country of the feree Blackfeet, and returning Mi safety to the, shores
of the bay. In the course of his journey he triversed an immense extent of unexplored country. It may be a moot point whether or not

Bfndry was the actual discoverer of the South Saskatchewan,
Certainly
his is the firs} unquestionably authentic description of the river, as well
as of thé’ great plain lying between the North and South Saskatchewan.
After leaving York Factory, Hendry’s course lay up the Hayes
river to what was then called Attick-Sagohan or Deer Lake, now known
a5 Knee lake, Even this far there is no record of any earlier explora-
tion, though it is quite possible that spre of the menof the Hudson's
Bay Company may have reached Kneb or Oxford likes on trading ex-
editions, There fs a note, however, on the margif, of Hendiy’s journal,
by Andrew Graham, afterward fagtor at Yorkjin which the signifiqant
statement is made that Hendry was “the first person who ‘ventired™
inland.” This lends at least some colour to the argument, advanced
by opponents of the company, that the whole story of Kellsey’s journey
Was a fabrication,
From Knee lake it becomes for a time a little more difficult to fol-
low Hendry’s movements. ‘The natural supposition would be that he
followed the aftetwards familiar. route by way of Oxford lake, Echima- ,
mish river and the Playgreen lakes to Lake Winnipeg ; and this suppos':
tion gains support from the fact that he presently mentions a lake which
he ealls Christianaux—one of the old French names for Lake Winnipeg.*
His distanées, however, put such a theory out of court; and evén if that
were not The case, Isis, description of Christianaux lake cannot be made
to fit Winnipeg. He makes the explicit statement that in crossing the
lake he “ passed 22 woody islands.” As everyone knows, the northern
end of Lake Winnipeg is singularly free of islands. On the other hand,
it took him two days to cross Christianaux lalgj-and he makes the dis-
tance fifty-one miles. Admitting that his distances may ave been some-
what exaggerated, (and as will be seen presently the probabilities point
the other way), there is no lake of this size—on the maps—anywhere
between York Factory and Lake Winnipeg. It happens, however, that
between Knee and Oxford lekes and Cross lake on the Nelson lies a cou-
siderable extent of country that his never been explored; or rather ‘t
‘was supposed that it had never been explored. One or two small lakes
appear-on the maps, but they «re purely conjectural.” Both the Nelson
river and the Hayes route have been carefully surveyed in recent years,
but no officer of the Geological Survey has ever yet traversed the country
between Oxford lake and the Nelson. So far as was known, up toa short
time’ago, no direct canoe route existed from Oxford lake to the Nelson.

In the summer of 1906, however, Mr. Owen O'Sullivan of the Survey
met at Oxford House the Rev. Mr. Banel, a missionary, who had just
come by canoe from his headquarters on Cross lake to Osfotd, and
had discovered about midway an unmapped lake, so large that he had
bbeen lost upon it for three days. ‘The lake was described as being about
a day's journey from Oxford lake. ‘There does not seomto be any rea-
sonable doubt that ihe lake discovered by Father Banet is the same tra-
versed by Hendry in 1754, and named by him Christianbux.
In tracing Hendry’s route throughout all this early -part of his
journey much help is derived from @ comparison of his journal with
that of another officer of the Hudson’s Bay Company, Mathew Cocking,
who journeyed inland from York Factory in 1772. Cocking’s Deer lake
is, beyond reasonable question, Hendry’s ‘Attick-Sagohai—present Knee
, lake; and the latter’s Christidnaux Inke becomes’ Pimochickomow in
Cocking’s narrative. Cocking notes the fact that there are “many
{islands in the lake,” and gives his distance through the lake as sixty-
five miles, from which it would appear that Hendry underestimated
rather than exaggerated the length of the lake.
Leaving Christianaux lake, Hendry’ apparently took the samae river
to Cross lake followed by Father Banel, For some reaéon he makes no
special mention of Cross lake, but says that he “ took his departure from
Shad fall” and paddled up a river. This river is given in Cock‘ug's
journal as the Minahage or Pine river—the Minago of our moder «
‘maps. ‘Ascending this stream he came to a large lake, which he calls
Othenume, afd Cocking, Oteatowan Sockoogan; evidently Moose lake.
Both Hendry’s’and Cocking’s descriptions agree with recent accounts
of Moose lake. Paddling up a river emptying into Moose Jake, Hendry
finally reached the Saskatchewan, or Keiskotchewan as he spels it, and
thé following day came to a French house, Fort “Basques,” at the
mouth of the Pasquia river.
This place, now known as The Pas, was a notable spot throughout
the entire period of the fur-trado, from the days of La Vérendrye down
The elder La Vérendrye, so far as his journals and letters show, was
never on the Saskatchewan, but one of his cons built Fort Bourbdn on
fhe shores of Cedar lake, about 1748, and ascended the river. as far 9s
the forks, somewhere below which he built Fort Poskoyac. After the
death of the élder La Vérendrye, in 1749, Jacques Legardeur de Seint-
Pierre was sent’out to continue his explorations in the far west. A
party of his men are said to haye ascended one of the branches of the
Saskatchewan to the: foot of the Rocky Mountains, in 1751, and built
there Fort La Jonquitre. This will be referred to again. “Two years
later Saint:Luc de La Corne, who had been sent to replace Saint-Pierre,

“is said to have built Fort Poskoyae—fort Poskoyac the second—on the
lower Saskatchewath:, In a paper read before the Society (B.S.C., 1906,
.
~ .
pt. I), Judge Prud’homme furnishes a very ingenious identification of
the various French forts built, or said to have been built, on the ‘Sas-,
eichewan, He enumerates six: Forts Bourbon and Poskoyac, built by
the La Vérendrye; Fort Ia Jonquidre, built,by de Niverville’s men;
and Forts La Corne, Poskoyac and Pasquia (Poste Pasquia), by Saint-
Tue de LaCorne. . ‘Of these, he says that Fort Bourbon was situated
upon-Cedar Jake, and La Jonguiére on the upper Saskatchewan.
The
two Forts Poskoyae were on the lower Saskatchewan; La Vérendrye’s
Poskoyae, near the Forks of the Saskatchewan ;. La Corne’s.tort of the
same narie, at the-entrance to Cumberland Lake; Fort La Corne some
distance befow the Forks; and Poste Pasquia on the Carrot river.
‘The late Dr. Elliott’Coues, in one of his foot-notes to the Henry-
Thompson Journals (‘ New Light on the Early History of the Greater
Northwest,” I1,-469), says that ‘The Pas, close to the mouth of the
Pasquia River, was the location of old Fort Poskoyac or Poscoiac. We*
have the evidence of both Hendry’s Journal and the Journal of Cocking
to prove that a French fort existed at or near the ipenth of the Pasquia
Rivet. The former establislige the presence of a second French fort,
.
between the mouth of the Paggnia and the Forks of the Saskatchewap—
in fact not very, many miles,Selow the Forks.
Hendry gives no name
to this upper fort, but mentions that it was “subordinate to Basquia.?
Cocking, paddling up the Saskitchewan in 1772, left Basquio on = >
August Ist, and ten days later reached a point on the river.whére the
families of his Indian guides vere awaiting them. “Formerly,” he
notes in hiswemmal, “ the French‘had a House here... From Basquit
to this place I make the course to ie 8. 88° W, and distaneé 150 miles.”
Three days before, that is on the Sth of the month, he had passed “an
old Trading House belonging to the French, pedlars before the gonguest
of Quebec,” This was about 92 niles from Bagguia, and 58 miles from
the upper fort. Cocking, therefote, gives us thrée, French posts between
Phe ‘Pas and the Forks. Hendry for some mpaton does not mention
the middle fost. Possibly-he-pmsced the spit after dark; or may have
been hugging the'other.bank of the: river atd_so missed it; or, again,
it'inay have been built after'‘his visit)
\
Of these thrée forts, we know that the/lower #rgs situated at the
inouth of the ‘Pasquia.
'Thete is less offBinty-as to the position of the
other two, Judge Prad’homme says of the upper one: “ Fort La Corne,
appelé Nipawi par les sauvages, fondé parle chevslier Saint-Lue de la
Come, & quelques milles 4 Pest de Ta jénction deg‘ branches sud et-nord
de Ia Saskatchewan, en 1753." He is soya indefinite as to-the posi-

tion, Sir Alexander Mackenzie says that the French had an
ment at Nipawi Jong before and at the conquest of Canada in
tho Jounal. of Alexander Henry, the Younger, it is stated
that he “camped at the spot where the French formerly had
sil
establish-
1763. In
(p. 482)
an estab-
Lishment called Fort Saint-Louis, built by Saint-Luc de la Corne in a
Jow bottom on the S. side, where some years ago were still to be-seen
remains of agricultural iniplements and carriage-wheels, Their roa
fo the plains is Still to be seen, winding Yp'divalhyton the S'side”
In foot-hotes to the Henry-Thompson Journals (pp. 4813), Dr-Coties
clearly identifies’ the position of this old ¥revich fort—La Corne, & la
Corne, de la Corne, St. Louis, Nipawi; Nippeween, as it was variously
called—as within the present Indian reserve, close to.or at the mouth,
of Payoeran er, and thus about 12 m, in an air line below the forks—
auch more by the bends of tha river. ‘The position is about the center
sof Tp. 48, R. xx, W. of thé-2d init, mirid.”
From Cocking’s dvécription of the river above Pasquia it is zeason-
ably'certain that the point he reached on August 11th, and where he
says the French formerly had a House, was the site of Fort La Corne,
although his distances are in that event far astray, He makes the dis-
tance from Pasquia to this point 150 miles, Jolin Fleming, who sur.
veyed-the river from Fort La Corne to The Pas in 1858 (Hind’s Nar- *
rative of the Canadian Red River Expedition,” etc., I, ch. XXI.), makes
the distance about 213 miles.
+ As to the third French post, betwoon Fort Le Corne and Fort
Poskoyae, this would seem to be Judge Prud’homme’s Fort Poskoyas
(the second), “appelé aussi Frangais, fondé.i Ventrée du lac. Cumber-
land par M.‘de la Corne, entre 1753 et 1755”; but if so, it could not.
have been situated at the entrance to Cumberland Lake. Fleming makes
the distance from ‘The Pas to Cumberland Lake 63 miles. Cocking
mentions a carrying-place, on the north side-of the river, into'a lake
named Menistaquatakow, which he makes 52 miles from Pasquia.- As
he appatently, took a short cut across Saskéram Lake, and thus avoided
the. deep bend in'the river north of that lake, his distances would about
agree with those of Fleming, and his Menistaquatakow would be Cum-
berland Lake. But the “old Trading House belonging to the French
pedlars,” which he passed on August sth, was about 58 miles above
Menistaquatakow Lake:
In the interval he had passed 2 small branch
on the south side of the Saskatchewan which “ joins the river a little
above Basyuia”—clearly Sipanok Canal, which runs almost due east
‘to Carrot:River, the latter joining the Saskatchewan a little above the
Pasquia. From Sipanok Canal to the old fort Cocking’s distance is
about 27 miles. 'A few miles heldw the fort he passed the mouth of a

branch bearing S. by E., which he'calls Peatagow River. On Fleming's
” map (Hind’s “Assiniboine and Saskatchewan Exploring Expedition,
1858”), a small stream is shown entering the Saskatchewan from the
south-east, about 103° 55’. As the middle post was about ten miles above
Peatagow River, we will be reasonably safe in placing it in long. 104°.
Whether or not this was the fort which Judge Prud’homme calls Fort
Poskoyae le second, built by La Corne between 1753 and 1755, it is
impossible to say. It certainly is nowhere near the site fixed by Judge
Prudhomme.
We have, then, the evidence of oth Hendry and Cocking as to the
existence of two French posts on the Saskatchewan, between the Forks
nd The Pas; and Cocking bears witness to the presence of a third.
With the exception of Fort La Corne, however, it is impossible to-re-
= eoncile Judge Prud’homme’s descriptions with the evidence of these
carly explorers, Hendry visited the French post at the mouth of the
Pasquia in 1754-55, and says of it, “This House has been long acplace
of Trade belonging to the French.” Judge Prud’homme dates the three
posts below the Forks between 1758 and 1755; that is to say, just about
the time of Hendry’s visit.
.
‘To sum up, the evidence afforded by these two journals goes to show
that/there were three French posts on the Saskatchewan between The
Pas and the Forks. Of these the oldest was that at The Pas, or the
mouth of the Pasquia, built by the Chevalier de La Vérendrye about
1748. The other two, built by Saint-Ime de La Come, were minor
posts; the first situated about 104°; and the upper post—Fort La Come
about 104° 32’. FortTa Corne was built in 1753; the lower fort may
have been-built after Hendry descended the river in 1755.
‘As Hendry is the only British explorer or trader known to have
visited Fort Poskoyae, or indeed any of the French forts west of Lake
“Superior, up to, the close of-the period of French rule in Canada, his
description of the fort, with the account of his meeting with the French
traders, is of exceptional value.
In this connection the following, from Robson’s “Account of Six
years residence in Hudson’s-Bay” (pp. 62-63), is of interest: “Ib is
universally believed among the servants, that the Frgnch travel many
hundred miles over land from Canada to the heads of our rivers in
the Bay, and that they have erected huts and settled a considerable
factory upon a lake°at the head of Nelson-river; trading with the
natives for the lightest and most, valuable furs, which. they carry a
long way before they find a conveyance by water; and this general
opinion is tiot taken up at random, but supported by particular incon-
testable evidences of the-fact T have seen French guns among the

atives that-come to Yorksfort; and once heard Mr. Brady, the sur
‘goon, converse with one of them in the French language, I have also
frequently seen in the governor's hand, a letter addressed to him from
the chief factor at the ‘French’ settlement on Nelson-river. It was
written in French and Indian; and the purport of it was to vstablish
1 trade between them and the English at York-fort,,
for those heay
goods which the French stood in great need of, but could not bring from
Canads, suck as guns, Kettles, tobacco, &e., and the English wete
desired to say, how siuch beaver they expected in exchange for these
articles. ‘Tho governor told us, that he had sent a copy of the letter
to England; and added, that if the Company consented to such a treaty,
ve should get no furs but what came through the hands of the French,
who would soon have huts all the way down Nelson-river.
“The linguists informed me, that they have-had a description of
the Fyench factory at the head of Nelson-river from different Indians,
who all agreed in the principal circumstances, and remarkably in this,
that the Fronch have a Jarge boat or sloop upon the lake. ‘These
people formerly would have ‘been glad to’have had the English accom-
pany them up the rivers; and were once very solicitous to engage us
4o Yo up, that we might head them against the French Indians; -but
they are now very easy and silent upon that subject; the French by
kind offices and a liberality in dealing, which we think of no conse-
quence, have obtained so much influence over almost all the natives,
that many of them are actually turned factors-for the French at our
settlements for heavy goods. ‘This the Indians openly acknowledged
to the linguist in the year 1746, just before I left York-fort.”
After Hendry’s day the ruins of the old fort are constantly referred
to by explorers and traders who passed them on their way xip the Saskat~
chewan, When Cocking went up in 1772 he mientions .Basquia as a
“Jong frequented place where the Canadians rendezvous and-trade with
the natives.” ‘Three years later, Alexander Henry, the elder, with, Joseph
and Thomas Frobisher and the notorious. Peter Pond, landed at a Cree
encampment on the Pasquia a little above its mouth, and therefore not
for from the site of Fort Poskoyae. ‘The traders were politely enter-
tained by a crafty old Indian river-baron named Chatiqne, who laid
tribute upon all that tifey had, comforting ther with the assurance that
if they dia not pay up cheerfully he would take their lives aswell as
their possessions. Alexander Henrv’s nephew and naiesake passed the
mouth of the Pasquia, or the little river of Montagne du Pas,”-as he
Zalls it, in 1808, and mentions that some traces of the old French estah-
lishment were even then visible.
'

‘Hendry has reached the Saskatchewan, and before speaking of his
further explorations, it may be in place to point out that he was’ the
first British trader upon” the waters of that great highway of the west.
‘There has been a widespread impression, based upon Alexander Mac-
kenzie’s statements in his History of the Fur Trade, that the first British
traders who reached the Saskatchewan came from Montreal. “In 1770,”
says Dr. Coues, “‘Thomas-Curry, of Montreal, journeyed to Foit Bour-
don, with guides, interpreters, and four canoes and wintered 1770-71.
‘This pioncer of all the English traders was satisfied with his venture,
and mever repeated it; but he was immediately succeeded by James
Finlay, who in 1771 went as far as Nipawi, then the last French settle:
ment on the Saskatchewan.” Curry and Finlay may be regarded as the
scouts of that great fur-trading enterprise that afterward became known:
as the North Wést Coimpany. ‘The men of the North West Company
are entitled to the credit of widespread explorations in the west, but the
honour of first reaching the Saskatchewan undoubtedly belongs to a
Hudson’s Bay man, Anthony Hendry. .
+ There seems, too, to have been some misundersténding as to the
relative claims of Curry and, Finlay, for we learn from Coéking that
Finlay was on the Saskatchewan at leist as early as 1767. In paddling
up the river, from Pasquia to the Forks, Cocking passed, the ruins of a
trading post in which, he saygp One Mr. Finlay, of Montreal, resided
five years ago.” Cocking passed the place in August, 1772. Under date
of July 23rd of the same year he notes in his journal, “The Pedlar.
Mr. Currie’ (who intercepted great part of York Fort trade this year)
is one.day’s paddling below this river, at Cedar Lake”; and Andrew
Graham, the Factor, adds in a footnote: “Mr. Currie’s encroachments
‘was the reason I sent Mr. Cocking inland.” This confirms Dr. Coues’
statement that Curry, or Currie, was somewhere on the lower waters of
the Saskatchewan in 1771, but it is evident that he did not return, that
yeat, ax he was at Cedar Lake in August, 1772; and five years earlier
Finlay was not merely on the Saskatchewan, but had built a trading
ost well up toward the Forks.
‘To return to Anthony Hendry and his journal.’ After he left Fort
Poskoyse his course lay for.a few iniles up the Saskatchewan; six miles,
secording to his journal. ‘Then he left the river and paddled sixteen
miles across a lake on the south side. This could only be Saskeram
Jake, Then, he says, he came to Peatago river, which he ascended for
fifty-five miles, until he could get no farther, and decided to abandon
his canoe. and travel overland. One would naturally suppose that his
river must be the small stream that enters the western end of Saskeram
Jake} but the distance travelled puts this out of the question. ‘The maps

[aunrer]
YORK FACTORY TO THE BLACKFEET COUNTRY,
318
show -no other. river emptying directly into Saskeram lakes bug I am.
informed by Mr. D. B. Dowling, ‘of the Geological Survey, to whom I
am indebted for a great deal of assistance in tracing Hendry’s course *
after he left the main Sestaihotan, ‘that in periods of high wate a
+ channel might easily be-f6tnd from Saskeram lake to Carrot river. In,
any event, a short portage would take Hendry to this important tributary
of the Saskatchewan, and ft can safely bé assumed that his. Peatago <
river was the Carrot.
‘July 27th, Hendry abandoned his canogs, and travelled “dverland
in a general southwesterly direction, He crossed the South Saskat- |“.
ehewan somewhere about Clark Crossing, north of Saskatoot, .and
three days later reached the North Saskatchewan,
Ho calls- the fornitr
‘Wapeseweopet, and the latter Sechonby. “As far as one exh judge he
|
|, reachied the North Saskatchewan.at the Elbow, where thé Canadian’, — . ,
Nortlern crosses the river, about midway between Prince Albert and if
Battleford. He did not eross’ the xiver, but continued ‘his wa;
westward, following its banks, to a point somewhere in’ the ne
hood of the site of Battleford.
From here he turned to the south-west until he came
river which he calls Chacittenah, presumably Sounding Creek, Neatly
a month later, after an uneventful journey over the
Great Plain, he.
‘crossed the Waskesew. tis pretty safs to assume thet this-was the Rel.
=
os
°
Deer, and that the place where Hendry crossed was a litile tbove Knox
oF
ills Creek. This conclusion is based upon careful compatisin ofthis
distances and directions and his description of the country, all threé «
pointing to the place indicated. Curiously enough=Waskesew meahs
Red Deer, but this in itself has no particular significance, as.there have”; - 7 ¢
Bak
-
been innumerable Deer rivers throughout the west.
ax
Anyone who has made a sindy of carly western pladenariies knows"
exe
of
route
the
to
guide
a
as
how useless they are; generally speaking,
plorers. Sometitne, asin the case of Samuel Hearne, those who attempl?.~
to trace the course of explorers on a modern map are ledabsolutely “*
astray by the application of a familiar name to aif entirely different body
of water. ° One experiences the same Wificulty, to an acute degree, in the ~
,
case of Hendry. An attempt to identify some of his place-namgs with
.
rivers and lakes known at one time or another under the same-name,
and to reconcile these with his distances and directions as worked out
fon a modern map, regyHed- in a state of such hopeless confusion that
the only safe pla seémed to be to ignore place-names altogether,
9°
so far as the identification: of hisvroute was concerned. Por instance,
=”
he inentiom’ a Nelson river, and one is only saved from the mistake of
confounding it with the present Nelson by the’fact/that the very next

6
.
ROYAL SOCIETY OF CANADA
day he reached ‘the Saskatchewan. When he comes to the Waskesew
the cgse is even-worse. In a foot-note Andrew Graham informs us that
“Keskatchew and Waskesew River is all one river, and is called by the
French Christiantux River, from the lake of that name.”
Undoubt-
edly the Red Deer and the Saskatchewan are all one river, but Hendry
has already Grossed the South Saskatchewan and seen the.North Saskal-
chewan, Why did he not iame them Keskateliew or Waskesew? Again,
here is the old Frenéh name Christianaux applied to the Saskateliewan,
and fo Lake Winnipeg.’ Hendry crossed a lake which hé names Chris
tianaws, and which by no possible manipulation of ‘his distances can.
be made to fit Lake Winnipeg. It is morally certain that he never
saw Lake Winnipeg on either his outward or return journey. One is
reduced to the conclusion that either he or Graham confused the large
lake-Which he crossed, and Which’ he named Chrstianans, with Lake
Winnipeg.
‘Three days. after crossing the Red Deer, Hendry arrived at a large
camp of Archithinue Indians. The name occurs repeatedly in his nar-
ative, dhd one of the chief objects of his-journey seems to.have been to
get Yn touch with this tribe and induce them to briny furs down
to York Factory. It would be impossible to identify the tribe with
any degige of certainty were it not that Cocking supplics the. key.
He, too, visited the Avehithinues| and.in his Journal. under date of
Deceinbier Ist, 1772, he says; “Thil-tribe is, named Powestic-Athinue-
wuek
(ie) Water fal
tic
‘There are..four/ Tribes or Nations
more, which are.
rian’ Indians; viz.: Mitheo-Athinuwuck or +
Bloody Infffits, “Koskitow-Wathesitock of Blackfooted Indians, Pego- °
now or Meddy-water Indians, and Sassewuck or Woody Country In--
dians.”* ‘The Archithinue Indians whom Hendry visited, and of whom
‘he gives an exceedingly interesting account, were, therefore, Blackfeet. .
‘The faetthat, although he went among them with no white companion,
he was well received, hospifaBly entertained, and permitted to spend the +
winter in the Blackfeet country without molestation, is Well’ worth
noting. in view of the fact that tho Tater history-f tho tribe is one’
long story of fierce hostility to the white men.’ One is fempted to be-
Tiese that the white man must.himelf have been, langely.responsible for
such a change of front on the part of the Blackfeet.
=
Hendry’s description of the manners and eustoms of this tribe, ‘as
he found them in 1754, nay very well hesxfpplemented bir the follow-
. ing particulars taken from Cockin®% jotigal’, “In all their actions,
+ See also Franklin's “Polar Sea.” I, 109, as to the divisions and names of

foourss] onic racronY fo tam utackwesir countRY | 817
a
1
he-says, “ they’ far excell the other’ Natives, “They gre-all well mounted
on light, sprightly Animals; their Weopons, Bows and Arrows. Several
‘hava on’ Jackets:of Moose leather six fold, quilted, and without sleeves.
‘They likewise use pack-horses, which gives their Women a great advan- NN
ge over the other Women who are either carrying or hauling of sledges
every day in the year. They appear to me more like Europeans than
Amerieans [meaning Indians
“Our ‘Archithinue friends dre very Hospitable, continus
ing us to partake of their best fares generally berries infused in water
with fat, very agreeable eating. ‘Their manner of showing respect to
* strangers is, in holding thé pipe while they smoke, This is done.three
“times, Afterwards every person smokes in common, the Women e1
cepted, whom I did nét observe to take the Pipe, ‘The-tobaceo they u
is of their own planting, which hath a disagreeable flavour; T have pre-
served a specimen. These people are much more cleanly in their cloath-
ing and food then my companions [Crees]. ‘Their victuals are dressed
- in earthern pots, of their own manufacturing; much in the same form,
as Neweastle pots, but-Wvithout fest; their fire tackling a black sténe
‘sed as flint, and a kind of ore as a steel, using tuss balls as tinder,
(é6.) @ kina of
mos .“
oe
“The Slaves whom they have"preserved alive are used with kind-
<
ness, They are young pedple of both sexes, and are adopted into the
families of those who have lost their children either by war or sickness. - —«
‘They torture all the aged of both sexes ina most shocking and-deliber-
fate manner.”
‘The information as to the Blackfeet and their manner of living,
at the time white men first went among them, ds contained im the jour-
nals of Hendiy and Cocking, may.be taken to correct the inaccurate
statements of later writers, based. upon insufficient evidence, For in-
stance, George Bird Grinnell, in his “Blackfoot Lodge Tales,” says
that “in ancient times it [fire] was obtained by means of fire sticks.... ~
The starting of the spark with these sticks is said to have been hari
work., At almost’ their first meeting with the whites they obtained
Aiints and steels, arid leaned how to use thom.” It is.clear from Qock-
ing’s ngrrative that the Blackfeet had something much more effective
than resticks in 1772, and that they did not have to thank white
men for a Knowledge of the principle of the flint and steel,
Aguin, Grinnell says: “Tt -is doubtful if the Blackfeet ever
made any pottery or basket’ware.” Cocking distinetly says that they
did make earthern pots; and Hendry was served with boiled buffalo meat
in wicker baskets. Again, Grinnell says that the Blackfeet obtained
horses in the earliest years of the nineteenth century. Hendry describes
.

s
*
*
“ROYAL SOCIETY OF CANADA
them as accomplished horsemen half a century before, and from his
account it is clear that the Blackfeet had possessed horses for many
years previously. Probably the earliest years of the eighteenth century
would be nearer the ‘mark, se the dite when the-Blackfeet first, made
nse of the horse.
After taking leave of the hospitable Blackfeet, Hendry travelled
in a leisurely fashion, first to the westward, crossing Knee Hills Creek’;
then north-west to a point near the present line of the Calgary abd
Edmonton railway, about 51° 50’ N. This was his farthest point, to the
westward. ‘Turning east, he crossed Three Hills Creek; turned north-
east and crossed Derils Pine Creek; returned to and re-crossed Three
Hills Creek; then north-east again to e long, narrow lake which he ealls
—Archithinue Lake, and which appears to have been present Devils Pino
Lake... It was-now-the end-of February, 1758, aida few days later
‘Hendry, having travelled north-east from Devils- Pine Lake, reached tho
Red Deer once more, many miles above the point where he had crossed
five months before. He journeyed down-stream on the ice for a few
miles, and then he and his Indians set to work to build canoes and gather
provisions for the long trip back to Hudson Bay. April 23rd, the
river began to break up, and five days later Hendry embarked and pad-
dled rapidly down-stream. He-followed the Red Deer to its junction
with the South Saskatchewan, and the latter to the Forks. ~ Below the
Forks he visited a French trading post, an outpost of the main estab-
lishment at the mouth of the Pasquia. At the latter he was.entertairied
by the officer in charge of the district, who had been absent on his out
| ward journey, This officer was no doubt La Corne. From Fort Poskoyaz
\. Hendry seems to have followed substantially thé same route as on his
outward trip, and reached York Fort'on June 20th, 1755, after an
absence of almost twelve months.
«In the couise of this eventful and very important journey, Hendry
explored an immense extent of new country. It is a debatable point
whether he was:the actual discoverer of the South Saskatchewan and
North Saskatchewan, ~ Certainly his is the only deseription we have of
any portion of either branch, up to the year 1754. As already men-
tioned, a party of Saint-Pierre’s men are said to have ascended one of
the branches to its upper waters, dnd built Fort La Jonquiére there, in
Arai; that is, thre. years before Hendry’s journey, Here is Saint-
BYerre’s own account of the matter, in his Jourmal:—* The order which
I gave to the Clievalier de Niverville, to establish a post three hundred
Teagues above that of Paskoya, was exeonted on the 20th May, 1761.
‘He sent off ten men in tiro canoes, who ascended the river Paskeya a2
far as the Rocky Mountains, where they’ made @ good fort,, which J

named Fort Lejonquidre, and a considerable store of provisions, in ex-
pectation of the arrival of M. de Niverville, who was to set out a month
after them, but was’ prevented by a serious illness.” Tt would appear
that de Niverville eventually reached Fort Lajonquiére, as, toward the
close of Saint-Pierre’s journal it is said: “ML. de Niverville... gave
me an account of what he hed learned at the settlement he had made
near the Rocky Mountains.”
In face of these circumstantial statements it does not seem possible
to deny the fact that one of the branches of the Saskatchewan was as-
cended for some distance in 1751,
and that Fort La Jonguiére was built
there. ‘The questions-in doubt are: which branch was ascended; and
where was Fott La Jonquitre built? As to the former, the evidence is
somewhat conflicting. On the one hand, it has been objected that Saint-
Pierre's nien could not have gone up the South Branch as that would
have brought them into the county ofthe Blacfer, by whom they ip-
evitably would have been murdered. This opinion is based upon later
experiences with the Blackfeet, but as has been seen, the Blackfeet
were exceedingly friendly to white men at the time of Hendry’s visit,
and if this was the case in 1754, it is altogether likely to have been the
case in 1751. ‘This argument, therefore, falls to the ground. - On the
other hand we have the direct statement that the'ruins of Fort La Jon-
quidre wete found by Captain E. Brisebois, of the North West Mounted
Police, at the place where the town of Calgary now stands.
“Bn 1875,”
says Judge Prad’homme, in his paper already alluded to (I, 72), “Ia,
capitaine E. Brisebois, de la police 4 cheval, fut chargé de batir un fort
au pied des Montagnes Rocheuses. Il Vérigea sur les bords de la riviére
des Ares, & Pendroit méme quoccupait jadis le fort La Jonquiére, dont
iT retrouva les ruines et lui donna le-nom de ‘ Fort Brisebois,’ anquel
a sucesdé depuis celui de Calgary.” Judge Prudhomme presumebly
obtained this information from Brisebois himself. In any case, M.
Benjamin Sulte says that some years ago Captain Brisebois told’ him
positively that he had discovered the ruins of an old fort, at the place
‘mentioned, which he believed to be those of Fort La Jonquiére. A. good
deal of weight naturally attaches to this direct statement.
Yet it can
scarcely De regarded as conclusive, Unless Captain Brisebois found
among the ruins something that positively identified the buildinig as a
French fort—and of this there is no evidence—otie would be rather in-
clined to think it the remains of an old North West Company fort
Remembering the temporary nature of the building erected by Saint-
Pierre's men, it is highly improbable that any vestige of it would rem
‘One hundred and twenty-four years afterward. Again, it is to say the
least singular that, if a 'party of French explorers did actually ascend

the South Saskatchewan in 1751, Hendry should hafe heard nothing
of it when he visited the Blackfeet three years later, and passed, as far
as one can judge, within fifty miléé of the place where Fort La Jonquiére
is said: to have been built, just three years before. On the whole, while
it seems certain that Fort La Jonquiére was actually built, at some point
‘on the upper waters of the Saskatchewan, there is no very convincing
proof available in favour of either branch, Until some reasonably ¢on-
clusive evidence i8 produced, one may be permitted to Keep an opea
mind, and lt he advocates of either branch Hight it out among them-
.
J selves.
One word in conclusion as to Hendry’s earlier history.
All that
wwe know is contained in a couple of notes, by Andrew Graham, appended
to the narrative, “This Anthony Hendey,” he says, “was born in the
Island of Wight, and-vas in the year 1748 outlawed for smuggling, and
in 1750, entertl into the-Company’s Service, the Directors not knowing
that he was under sentence of outlewry. This person, whom I knew
well, was Bold, enterprising, and’ voluntarily offered his service to go
inland with the nativet and explore the country, and to endeavour to
Gray down the different tribes to the Factory. Before this time none
of the sorvants dt the Factories had ventured to winter with the natives.
‘The accounts of horsemen being inland were not eredited. He, Hendey,
‘was misrepresented by those in the Bay who were not acting a just part
to the Company,.and he pereciving not likely to meet with promotion
he had so deservedly merited, quitted the Company's service. Which
made one of the directors observe afterwards, “That a valuable servant
oftentimes was not known until lost.’
In another note. Steyn
T knew thie man; he,was a bold and good servant and wa&\drovg from
the Company's service by the ships gentry because he would“Hot buy
slops and brandy from them. He was the first person who ventured
inland. I was’ then writer at York Fort.”



[1] ‘Hendry may bave got the name from DeLisles Garde ay Canade,"1703, oF
applies to a suppositious, take, north of Lake Nipigon, and connected with
Tac den Astenipoules—one of the several names adpiled to Lake, Winnlper,

[2] + See also Franklin's “Polar Sea.” I, 109, as to the divisions and names of
the Blackfeet confederacy.”
,

