July 1. Monday. Took my departure from Musketo-point, and paddled seventeen miles N.W. A heavy rain towards noon with thunder and lightning. The lands high, rocky with shrubby woods. Very shallow water with stones, which obliged us to carry our canoes and goods in several places [1].

2. Tuesday. Took my departure from Stony-Banks, and paddled 23 miles NW. The river narrow and full of large stones. The banks are rocky and very little woods. The ¥ifad looks very barren. We have neither seen fish nor fowl yet, so wo are scarce of provisions.

3. Wednesday. Took my departure from Tickomeg Reach, and paddled up a branch of Steel River 12 miles N.W.; passed much shoal water with rocky ground; obliged to carry our canoes over it. Passed thirty islands; on one of them grows a few birch trees. The banks of the River are low, on which, grows Small Pines. Saw several Craw-fish and killed a duck.

4, Thursday. Left Craw-fish Fall and paddled 22 miles West [2]. Falls and Islands much the same as yesterday. Indians killed three Beaver; here are plenty of their houses.

5. Friday. Took my departure from fortunate Fall and paddled 25 miles W.b.So. & W.S.W.; passed much shoal-waters; and twenty-four islands; there is not a foot of water for a mile. We are greatly fatigued with carrying and hauling the Canoes, and not very well fed, but the Natives are continually Smoking, which I already experience allays hunger.

6. Saturday. Took my departure from Pike-reach, and paddled 26 miles W.bS.; then we left Steel River and entered Attick-Sagohan, or Deer Lake [3]; killed a good many pike and three Ducks, which are very acceptable.

7. Sunday. Took my departure from Three-Beacon Island’ and
paddled 12 Miles W.S.W.; thon camé to the River. ‘The Natives are
divided as to the name of this River; however, it cannot with propriety
be ealled Apet-$epec, or Stee! River>
We paddied 12 miles up it.
The
Banks are hills and dales on which grow small pines. ‘The River 12
poles rides the water very deep in some places, and in other places no!
aix imches water and many Islands. Decr-Lake Ss large and deep, en-
compassed with tall woods of Pines and Birch trees.

8. Monday. Paddled 26 Miles up the River. W.N.W.; Islands
and Rocks all the way, In the evening, left the River, and put up on an
Island in Christianaux: Lake?

9. Tuesday. Took my departure from Bgg Island, and paddled
26 miles S.1V, & S.W.D.S. in the Lake; passed 22 woody Islands, and
put up on one for the night.

10. Wednesday. ‘Took’ my departure from’ Pike Islands, and
Paddfea)25 miles W.S.W. until we came to a river on the West side the
Lake, Where we put up for the sight.

11. Thursday. ‘Took my departure from Shad Fall and paddled
two miles S.W. up the River, when it began to blow with Rain, which
obliged us to put up. Here twenty Canoes of Natives passed us on their
way to York Fort,'withwhom T sent a letter to Mr. Fames Isham, the
Chief.

12. Friday. A continuance of rain; paddled none, Some. drink.
ing and others fishing.
ish is our daily food.
“This river, he says, cannot with propriety be called Steel river.

13. Saturday,
Paddled 28 miles.
828
‘The River wide with small
Islands; Banks low and amall woods; our course to-day S.W.

14, Sunday. Paddled 25 miles $.WV, The River in general good
water, Indians caught 2 good many large Pike,

15. Monday. Paddled 24 miles S.WW.b.S. amet four Canoes of Tn-
ddians in the French interest the Leader’s name Monkonsko. He behaved
civilly and infgrmed me that I was on the Confines of the dry inland
country, called by the Natives the Muscuty Tuskee; and that I should
soon see a French House.

16. Tuesday. Padaled 20 miles S.W, . then came to Othenume
Lakes

17, Wednesday. Paddled 20 miles 8.W.b.S.; than came to a River.
Othenume Lake is a good day’s‘paddle either way; and the woods around
it ate tall and well grown timber.

18, ‘Thursday. Paddled 26 miles up the river; good water for a:
Canoe; the river wide, banks high, and no woods to be seen; no pro-
visions to be got but fish.

19. Friday. Paddled 26 miles up the river,

20. Saturday. Paddled 6 miles S.W.b.S. and after dragging ovr
Canoes $ miles thro™a Swampy drain intermixed with Willows, came
to Nelson River and paddled on until we eame to a small branch. The
River is 16 potes wide. water deep and current runs Basbrard, and low
banks with poplars and willows.

21, Sunday,
“Paddled two miles up the Rivér, and then came to
Keiskatchewan * River, on which the French have two houses, one of
which we expect to see to-morrow; paddled up it § miles West; passed
@ large lake, which helps. to supply the-River,

22.- Monday.
‘The Musketoes are now intolerable, giving us neither
peace day nor night; paddled 14 miles up the. River West, when we
came to a French house.’ On our arrival two Frenchmen came to the
ater-side, and in a very genteel manner, invited.me into their house,—
which 1 readily accepted. One of them asked me if I had any Letter
from my Master, apd where, and on what design I was going inland.
1 answered L had no letter, and that I was sent to view the Country,
and intended to return in the Spring. He told me the Master and men
‘were gone down to Montreal with the furs; and that they must detain
nie till their vetarn, However they were very kind; and at night T
went to my tent, and told Attickashish, or Little Deer, my Leader,*
that hed the charge of me, who smiled and said they dared not. I sent
thet two feet of tobacco, which was very acceptable to them.

23. Tuesday. Invited to Breakfast and Dinner; thanked me for
the tobacco, and presented. tg me some moose flesh,

24, Wednesday. “Took my departure from the French Settlement,
and padiled up Keiskatchewan River 6 miles; the Course West ‘Thea
left it and padded 16 miles W.b,S. across a Lake ;* then came to Peatago
River;* here are the largest, Birch trees T have yet seen.

25. ‘Thursday. Paddied up Pentago River 27 miles S.Wb.W.
Lange Birch trees on both sides.the River, We still live on fish and“are
all heartily wishing for a change of food. This river is small, but good
vwater_gs.yet. To-morrow we shall leave our ennoes and travel

26, Friday. Paddled 28 Miles S.W.D.W. up Peatago River, shonl
waters passé 9 Isang, 4 Falls, and several Canoes, which the natives
“had Jett on account of shoal water

27, Saturday. Very shoal water. “Word wwe left our Canoes and
‘travelled 4 miles.8.W.b.8. Here were our Indians Families in a stafy-
ing condition, for want of food; and we are in the same condition.

28, Sunday. Travelled 26 miles SAW.bW. passed two erecks and
‘two Indian, tent-places, Neither Bird ‘nor Benst to be scen,—so. that
we have nothing to eat.

29. Monday, Travelled 24 miles S.W. when fortunately met with
a fine bed of Strawhervies. of which T did not eat very heartily,—as
did the Natives.
‘Tivo~iles farther, we met with berries the size of
black currants and the finest I ever eat. I, as also the Natives, are
fatigued with our two days’ journies, which-wo are obliged to, perform
to come up to where provisions are to be had.

30, ‘Tuesday. ‘Travelled ‘16 miles S.WW, level land, cherry trees,
and fields of tares.are full and ripe as any in England. Indians killed
two Moose, “9t

31. Wednesday. Travelled 13 Miles W.S.W. Level lands and
burnt woods; and there.are“nothing but stagnated water to drink.
Came to two tents of Asinepoet Tndians:'
( smoaked with them, and
talked with them to go down with me to York Fort in the summer, but
they answered, “We are conveniently supplied from the Pagua-Mista-
gushewuck Whiskeheginish.” That is, the Frenchman’s Housé of
Tade#


[1] At or near present Mossy Portage. Sir John Franklin mentions this portage in the narrative of his frst overland expedition, 1819-22, and says that the canoes were carried through a deep bog for a quarter of a mile. "The river swells out," he says, “above this portage, to the breadth of several miles, and ad the islands are numerous there are a great variety of channels." Every traveller who has gone over Hayes route speaks feelingly of the difficulties of navigation below Swampy lake. Mossy portage is but one of many on this portion of the river. Cocking's Journal at this point is nothing much more than a dull repetition of the phrase, "paddled, dragged, and carried the canoes and goods most part of this day."

[2] Hendry was now passing through Swampy lake. At the entrance to the lake there was, in Franklin's day, a point bearing the significant name of the Dramstone. "We complied," he says dryly, "with the custom from which it derives its name." Here the boats' crews were accustomed to celebrat the termination of the laborious ascent ot Hill River. David Thompson, the famous astronomer of the North West Company, in a description of the Hayes route, says of the portion of the  river below Swampy lake: "This distanee is but a succession of banks of sand, impetuous current, broken rocks cropping up to water level; it requires twelve portages, independently of partial discharges and disembarkments at several places." Dr. Robert Bell, in his Report on the country between Lake Winnipeg and Hudson Bay, 1878, says that Swampy lake is a narrow strip of water ten milles long: that its name is derived from a point composed of peat on the northwest side, about half-way down. He adds that for nineteen miles below Swampy lake the river flows through a labyrinth of small islands.

[3] Hendry's distances rather ft in with the theory that his Attick-Sagohan was present Oxford lake, but the course below cannot be reconciled with his passage through the broad expanse of Knee lake. It seems more reasonable to conclude that this lake, the first mentioned on his Journey, was Knee lake. From Swampy lake, which is nothing more than a comparatively insignificant widening of the river, his courses lay up Jack river. His distances here are exaggerated. Jack river is only about ten miles long, very much broken by rapids in the lower half of to course. Knee lake, according to Dr. Bell, has total length of forty miles. Hendry traversed the lower portion, and then entered the river, which he is now about to describe.
