May 1. Thursday. Paddled 30 Miles down the river: High banks: a great many Islands, & lofty woods: the water hath fallen a little: we are joined by 20 more canoes.

2. Friday. Paddled 30 miles down the river.

3. Saturday. Paddled 30 miles down the river: it is very Large and many Islands, with lofty well-grown woods.

4. Sunday. Paddled 40 miles S.E.b.E.; killed 4 Waskesew & 2 Buffalos.

5. Monday. Paddled 20 miles N.N.E. & E.b.N.N.: the river very wide & deep water.

6. Tuesday. Paddled 30 miles: We expect to see the Archithinue Natives.

7 & 8. Wednesday & Thursday. Paddled 66 miles down the river: provisions begin to be scarce.

9. Friday. Paddled 30 iniles N.E.b.N. down the river.

10. Saturday. Paddled 40 miles N.N.E.: the river deep & the banks high: Indians killed a Buffalo.

11. Sunday. Paddled 30 miles N.N.E.: River.as yesterday.

12. Monday. Paddled 10 miles E.b.N. then came to one hundred tents of Archithiane Natives. Their Leader invited me to his tent, and gave me plenty of Buffalo flesh: our Indians bought a great many Wolves from them, for old axes &c [1]. I could not persuade them to go to the Fort.

13. Tuesday. Paddled 30 Miles: killed 4 Buffalo, a great number giazing along the Banks. The Archithinue Natives were mounted on good Horses.

14. Wednesday. Paddled 15 Miles: then killed 20 Buffalo grazing along the river side.

15. Thursday. Paddled none: killed a great number of Buffalos; Indian women and children employed drying meat. One hundred and twenty seven tents of Archithinue Natives came to us: I bought 30 Wolves' skins from them and the Indians purchased great numbers of Wolves, Beaver & Foxes etc. which proves what the Woman formerly told me, concerning the Natives getting part of their Furs from the Archithinue Indians. They told me that I should soon see their Leader. I did my Endeavour to get some down to the Fort; but all in vain: and altho' the Indians promised the Chief Factor at York Fort to talk to them strongly on that Subject, they never opened their mouths; and I have great reason to believe that they are a stoppage: for if they could be brought down to trade, the others would be obliged to trap their own Furs: which at present two thirds of them do not. These brave Natives swimmed their Horses across the river; they looked more like to Europeans than Indians. They shared amongst us 10 Buffalo.

16. Friday. Paddled 30 Miles N.b.E. when we came to 30 tents of Archithinue Natives: I talked with them as I did with the others; but all to no purpose. Our Indians traded a great many Furs from them. They have the finest Horses I have yet seen here, and are very kind people [2].

17. Saturday. Paddled none. Ten tents of Eagle Indians joined the Archithinue Indians. Five Canoes of them are going to the Fort with me. They are a tribe of the Asinepoet Nation; and like them use the Horses for carrying the baggage and not to ride on. I was invited to the Archithinue tents, where were feasting etc.: muth in the same manner as our Indians practice.

18. Sunday. Paddled 22 Miles N.E.; the river broad & deep with many Islands: the banks low & small woods, Viz: Birch Hazle Poplar & Fir: killed four Buffalo; they are numerous about the river sides.

19. Monday. Paddled 20 Miles N.E.b.E.; River as before; Musketoes plenty.

20. Tuesday. Paddled 30 Miles N.E.b.N. a noble spacious river.

21. Wednesday. Paddled none. Seventy tents of Archithinue Natives came to us, headed by the Leader, that I saw in the Muscuty Country: I used my utmost endeavors to get a few of his young men to the Fort; but to no purpose. They hnd very few Wolves or Furs of any kind, having traded them before with the Pegogamaw Indians who are gone to the Fort. We are above 60 Canoes and there are scarce a Gun, Kettle, Hatchet, or, Knife amongst us, having traded them with the Archithinue Natives.

22. Thursday. Paddled 30 Miles North & N.b.W. the river broad and deep, no Islands. It appears to me at present to be a fine river but the Indians tell me that it is almost dry in the middle of Summer. The young men killed 4 Buffalo this morning & I gave away the remains of my powder & shot.

23. Friday. Padded 20 Miles N.E. then came to a French Trading House [3] where were 6 men. The Master invited me to supper, but we had no bread until we were done; then He presented me with half a biscuit and a dram of French Brandy, and told me that this House was subordinate to Basquea and they heard of my passing by last Autumn.

24. Saturday. The Natives received from the Master ten Gallons of Brandy half adulterated with wtaer; and when intoxicated they traded Cased Cats, Martens, & good parchment Beaver skins, refusing Wolves & dressed Beaver. In short he received from the Natives nothing but what were prime Winter furs.

25. Sunday. Rained hard last night; I could not get the Natives away to-day; It is surprising to observe what an influence the French have over the Natives; I am certain he hath got above 1000 of the richest Skins.

26. Monday. Padddled 47 miles N.E.b.N. the River broad and lofty woods.

27. Tuesday. Paddled 70 miles N.E.: Low banks, Tall woods, and deep water.

28. Wednesday. ‘Thunder & lightning. Paddled 24 miles E.N.E. then came to a Creck where we angled plenty of Fish which were acceptable.

29. Thursday. Paddled 60 miles, then came to a French House I passed last Autumn [4]; there were a Master & 9 men. On our arrival they gave the Natives 10 Gallons of Brandy adulterated, and they are now drunk: The Master [5] invited me in to sup with him, and was very kind: He is dressed very Genteel, but the men wear noting but thin drawers, & striped cotton shirts ruffled at the hands & breast. This House has been long a place of Trade belonging to the French, & named Basquea. It is 26 feet long; 12 feet wide; 9 feet high to the ridge; having a sloping roof; the Walls Log on Log; the top covered with Birch-rind, fastened together with Willows, & divided into three apartments: One for Trading goods, one for Furs, and the third they dwell in.

30. Friday. The-Indians drank so much I could not get them away; nor was I capable to prevent them from trading their prime furs. I breakfasted with the French Master, and he showed me the stock of Furs Vis: A brave parcel of Cased Cats, Martens, and parchment Beaver. Their Birch-rind Canoes will carry as much as an India Ships Long-boat, and draws little water; and so light that two men can carry one several miles with ease. they are made in the same form and slight materials as the small ones; only a thin board runs along their bottem; & they can sail them when before the wind, but not else. The French talk Several Languages to perfection: they have the advantage of us in every shape; and if they had Brazile tobaeco [6], which they have not, would entirely cut off our trade. They have white tobacco made up in Roles of 12 lb wt. each. The Master desired me to bring or send him a piece of Brazile tobacco, & a quart, or pint; japanned drinking mug.

31. Saturday. The Indians would not set out: they have kept a continued trading with the French; and I believe many would trade all if they could persuade the French to take their heavy furs. Breakfasted &c with the Master; He said he was going with the furs to one of the Chief settlements [7], as soon as he received the Furs from the upper house, which would be in a few days hence.

[1] Thus confirming what they had told him on Dec. 28th.

[2] These are the same Blackfeet who were in later times reputed the most determined and ruthless foes of the Whites.

[3] Fort La Corne.

[4] Fort Poskoyac, or Pasquia.

[5] Presumably Saint-Luc de la Corne.

[6] See foot-note, p. 321 of Bain's Henry.

[7] Kaministiquia, or, perhaps, Michilimackinac.
