June 1. Sunday. Could not paddle: Breakfasted with the Master: Several Asinepoet Natives distributed their heavy Furs and Pelts, that the French have refused, amongst our Indians with directions what to trade them for.

2. Monday. Paddled 70 miles E.N.E. & N.E.b.N. deep water & tall woods.

3. Tuesday. Paddled none: mustered my Gang total 70 Canoes.

4. Wednesday. Paddled 60 miles N.E.b.N. & entered Christianaux Lake.

5. Thursday. Paddled 40 miles N.E.b.N. sometimes in Lakes & sometimes in Rivers; Carried our Canoes over three points of land.

6. Friday. Paddled & dragged our Canoes 20 miles: Shoal Water & Stones.

7. Saturday. Paddled 40 miles N.N.E. & N.b.E. barely depth of water for our Canoes: killed several large Pike and Carp with our paddles.

8. Sunday. Paddled none: killed plenty of fish.

9. Monday. Paddled 50 miles down the River: Good water, pleasant banks, with large lofty woods.

10. Tuesday. Paddled none: all hands employed killing Fish Viz. Carp, Guyniad, & Pike, also a few Shads, Burbot [1] and Perch: the fish eats insipidly without Salt; my stock being expended.

11. Wednesday. Padiled to Mekekeman Lake [2] Caught several Sturgeon with out Fish-gigs; good food.

12. Thursday. Paddled half way through the Lake and came to small Island where we put up for the night.

13. Friday. Paddled across the Lake and came to a small river where we put up for the night.

14. Saturday. Paddled down the river and came to Deer Lake.

15. Sunday. Paddled through Deer Lake and came to Steel river: here met with 4 Canoes who had been at the Fort, & who informed me of the death of Mr. Skrimsheur, second in Command at York Fort; and that the Governor & all the men were well. Went & found my tobacco safe, that I left here last Autumn: We smoked drank out two Runlets of Brandy that the Natives had brought from the fort.

16 to 20. Monday to Friday. Sometimes had good water & sometimes dragged our Canoes; had serveral Canoes damaged: when on the 20th day of this month of june we arrived at the fort, where we were kindly received.

[1] Lota maculos.

[2] Possibly Oxford lake.
